<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="book-2" epub:type="part">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="part-2-1" epub:type="division">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">1</h3>
				<p>After this let us start from a new beginning and speak about what follows from it. All goods are either outside or in the soul, and of these those in the soul are more desirable; this distinction we make even in our popular discussions. For prudence, virtue, and pleasure are in the soul, and some or all of these seem to all to be the end. But of the contents of the soul some are states or faculties, others activities and movements.</p>
				<p>Let this then be assumed, and also that virtue is the best state or condition or faculty of all things that have a use and work. This is clear by induction; for in all cases we lay this down: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> a garment has an excellence, for it has a work and use, and the best state of the garment is its excellence. Similarly a vessel, house, or anything else has an excellence; therefore so also has the soul, for it has a work. And let us assume that the better state has the better work; and as the states are to one another, so let us assume the corresponding works to be to one another. And the work of anything is its end; it is clear, therefore, from this that the work is better than the state; for the end is best, as being end: for we assume the best, the final stage, to be the end for the sake of which all else exists. That the work, then, is better than the state or condition is plain.</p>
				<p>But “work” has two senses; for some things have a work beyond mere employment, as architecture has a house and not the act of building, medicine health and not the act of curing and restoring to health; while the work of other things is just their employment, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> of vision seeing and of mathematical science contemplation. Hence, necessarily, in those whose work is their employment the employment is more valuable than the state.</p>
				<p>Having made these distinctions, we say that the work of a thing is also the work of its excellence, only not in the same sense, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> a shoe is the work both of the art of cobbling and of the action of cobbling. If, then, the art of cobbling and the good cobbler have an excellence, their work is a good shoe: and similarly with everything else.</p>
				<p>Further, let the work of the soul be to produce living, this<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24" id="noteref-24" epub:type="noteref">24</a> consisting in employment and being awake⁠—for slumber is a sort of inactivity and rest. Therefore, since the work must be one and the same both for the soul and for its excellence, the work of the excellence of the soul would be a good life. This, then, is the complete good, which (as we saw)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-25" id="noteref-25" epub:type="noteref">25</a> was happiness. And it is clear from our assumptions (for these were<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-26" id="noteref-26" epub:type="noteref">26</a> that happiness was the best of things, and ends and the best goods were in the soul; and it is itself either a state or an activity),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-27" id="noteref-27" epub:type="noteref">27</a> since the activity is better than the state, and the best activity than the best state, and virtue is the best state, that the activity of the virtue of the soul is the best thing. But happiness, we saw,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a> was the best of things; therefore happiness is the activity of a good soul. But since happiness was<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-29" id="noteref-29" epub:type="noteref">29</a> something complete, and living is either complete or incomplete and so also virtue⁠—one virtue being a whole, the other a part⁠—and the activity of what is incomplete is itself incomplete, therefore happiness would be the activity of a complete life in accordance with complete virtue.</p>
				<p>And that we have rightly stated its genus and definition common opinions prove. For to do well and to live well is held to be identical with being happy, but each of these⁠—living and doing⁠—is an employment, an activity; for the practical life is one of using or employing, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> the smith produces a bridle, the good horseman uses it.</p>
				<p>We find confirmation also in the common opinion that we cannot ascribe happiness to an existence of a single day, or to a child, or to each of the ages of life; and therefore Solon’s advice holds good, never to congratulate a man when living, but only when his life is ended. For nothing incomplete is happy, not being whole.</p>
				<p>Further, praise is given to virtue because of its actions, but to actions something higher than praise, the encomium. And we crown the actual conquerors, not those who have the power to conquer but do not actually conquer. Further, our judging the character of a man by his acts is a confirmation. Further, why is happiness not praised? Surely because other things are praised owing to this, either by their having reference to it or by their being parts of it. Therefore felicitation, praise, and encomium differ; for encomium is discourse relative to the particular act, praise declares the general nature of the man, but felicitation is for the end. This clears up the difficulty sometimes raised⁠—why for half their lives the good are no better than the bad, for all are alike when asleep; the cause is that sleep is an inactivity, not an activity of the soul. Therefore, even if there is some other part of the soul, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> the vegetative, its excellence is not a part of entire virtue, any more than the excellence of the body is; for in sleep the vegetative part is more active, while the perceptive and the appetitive are incomplete in sleep. But as far as they do to some extent partake of movement, even the visions of the good are better than those of the bad, except so far as they are caused by disease or bodily defect.</p>
				<p>After this we must consider the soul. For virtue belongs to the soul and essentially so. But since we are looking for human virtue, let it be assumed that the parts of the soul partaking of reason are two, but that they partake not in the same way, but the one by its natural tendency to command, the other by its natural tendency to obey and listen; if there is a part without reason in some other sense, let it be disregarded. It makes no difference whether the soul is divisible or indivisible, so long as it has different faculties, namely those mentioned above, just as in the curved we have unseparated the concave and the convex, or, again, the straight and the white, yet the straight is not white except incidentally and is not the same in essence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-30" id="noteref-30" epub:type="noteref">30</a></p>
				<p>We also neglect any other part of the soul that there may be, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> the vegetative, for the above-mentioned parts are peculiar to the human soul; therefore the virtues of the nutritive part, that concerned with growth, are not those of man. For, if we speak of him <i>qua</i> man, he must have the power of reasoning, a governing principle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-31" id="noteref-31" epub:type="noteref">31</a> moral action; but reason governs not reason, but desire and the passions; he must then have these parts. And just as general good condition of the body is compounded of the partial excellences, so also the excellence of the soul, <i>qua</i> end.</p>
				<p>But of virtue or excellence there are two species, the moral and the intellectual. For we praise not only the just but also the intelligent and the wise. For we assumed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-32" id="noteref-32" epub:type="noteref">32</a> that what is praiseworthy is either the virtue or its act, and these are not activities, but have activities. But since the intellectual virtues involve reason, they belong to that rational part of the soul which governs the soul by its possession of reason, while the moral belong to the part which is irrational but by its nature obedient to the part possessing reason; for we do not describe the character of a man by saying that he is wise or clever, but by saying that he is gentle or bold.</p>
				<p>After this we must first consider moral virtue, its nature, its parts⁠—for our inquiry has been forced back on this⁠—and how it is produced. We must make our search as all do in other things⁠—they search having something to start with; so here, by means of true but indistinct judgements, we must<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-33" id="noteref-33" epub:type="noteref">33</a> try to attain to what is true and distinct. For we are now in the condition of one who describes health as the best condition of the body, or Coriscus as the darkest man in the marketplace; for what either of these is we do not know, but yet for the attainment of knowledge of either<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-34" id="noteref-34" epub:type="noteref">34</a> it is worth while to be in this condition. First, then, let it be laid down that the best state is produced by the best means, and that with regard to everything the best is done from the excellence of that thing (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> the exercises and food are best which produce a good condition of body, and from such a condition men best perform exercises). Further, that every condition is produced and destroyed by some sort of application of the same things, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> health from food, exercises, and weather.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-35" id="noteref-35" epub:type="noteref">35</a> This is clear from induction. Virtue too, then, is that sort of condition which is produced by the best movements in the soul, and from which are produced the soul’s best works and feelings; and by the same things, if they happen in one way, it is produced, but if they happen in another, it is destroyed. The employment of virtue is relative to the same things by which it is increased and destroyed, and it puts us in the best attitude towards them. A proof that both virtue and vice are concerned with the pleasant and the painful is that punishment being cure and operating through opposites, as the cure does in everything else, acts through these.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-2-2" epub:type="division">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">2</h3>
				<p>That moral virtue, then, is concerned with the pleasant and the painful is clear. But since the character, being as its name indicates something that grows by habit<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-36" id="noteref-36" epub:type="noteref">36</a>⁠—and that which is under guidance other than innate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-37" id="noteref-37" epub:type="noteref">37</a> is trained to a habit by frequent movement of a particular kind⁠—is the active principle present after this process, but in things inanimate we do not see this (for even if you throw a stone upwards ten thousand times, it will never go upward except by compulsion)⁠—consider, then, character to be this, <abbr>viz.</abbr> a quality in accordance with governing reason belonging to the irrational part of the soul which is yet able to obey the reason. Now we have to state in respect of what part of the soul we have character of this or that kind.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-38" id="noteref-38" epub:type="noteref">38</a> It will be in respect of the faculties of passion, in virtue of which men are spoken of as subject to passion, and in respect of the habits, in virtue of which men are described, in reference to those passions, either as feeling them in some way or as not feeling them. After this comes the division made in previous discussions<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-39" id="noteref-39" epub:type="noteref">39</a> into the passions, faculties, and habits. By passions I mean such as anger, fear, shame, sensual desire⁠—in general, all that is usually followed of itself by sensuous pleasure or pain. Quality does not depend on these⁠—they are merely experienced⁠—but on the faculties. By faculty I mean that in virtue of which men who act from their passions are called after them, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> are called irascible, insensible, amorous, bashful, shameless. And habits are the causes through which these faculties belong to us either in a reasonable way or the opposite. <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> bravery, temperance, cowardice, intemperance.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-2-3" epub:type="division">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">3</h3>
				<p>After these distinctions we must notice that in everything continuous and divisible there is excess, deficiency, and the mean, and these in relation to one another or in relation to us, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> in the gymnastic or medical arts, in those of building and navigation, and in any sort of action, alike scientific and non-scientific, skilled and unskilled. For motion is continuous, and action is motion. In all the mean in relation to us is the best; for this is as knowledge and reason direct us. And this everywhere also makes the best habit. This is clear both by induction and by reasoning. For opposites destroy one another, and extremes are opposite both to one another and to the mean; for the mean is to either extreme the other extreme, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> the equal is greater to the less, but less to the greater. Therefore moral virtue must have to do with the mean and be a sort of mediety. We must then notice what sort of mediety virtue is and about what sort of means; let each be taken from the list by way of illustration, and studied:</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td>irascibility</td>
							<td>lack of feeling</td>
							<td>gentleness</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>audacity</td>
							<td>cowardice</td>
							<td>bravery</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>shamelessness</td>
							<td>shyness</td>
							<td>modesty</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>intemperance</td>
							<td>insensibility</td>
							<td>temperance</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>envy</td>
							<td>(unnamed)</td>
							<td>righteous indignation</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>gain</td>
							<td>loss</td>
							<td>the just</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>lavishness</td>
							<td>meanness</td>
							<td>liberality</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>boastfulness</td>
							<td>self-depreciation</td>
							<td>sincerity</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>habit of flattery</td>
							<td>habit of dislike</td>
							<td>friendliness</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>servility</td>
							<td>stubbornness</td>
							<td>dignity</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>luxuriousness</td>
							<td>submission to evils</td>
							<td>endurance</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>vanity</td>
							<td>meanness of spirit</td>
							<td>greatness of spirit</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>extravagance</td>
							<td>pettiness</td>
							<td>magnificence</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>cunning</td>
							<td>simplicity</td>
							<td>prudence</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>These and similar are the passions that occur in the soul; they receive their names, some from being excesses, some from being defects. For the irascible is one who is angry more than he ought to be, and more quickly, and with more people than he ought; the unfeeling is deficient in regard to persons, occasions, and manner. The man who fears neither what, nor when, nor as he ought is confident; the man who fears what he ought not, and on the wrong occasions, and in the wrong manner is cowardly. So “intemperate” is the name for one prone to sensual desire and exceeding in all possible ways, while he who is deficient and does not feel desire even so far as is good for him and in accordance with nature, but is as much without feeling as a stone, is insensible. The man who makes profit from any source is greedy of gain; the man who makes it from none, or perhaps few,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-40" id="noteref-40" epub:type="noteref">40</a> is a “waster.” The braggart is one who pretends to more than he possesses, the self-depreciator is one who pretends to less.) The man who is more ready than is proper to join in praise is a flatterer; the man who is less ready is prone to dislike. To act in everything so as to give another pleasure is servility, but to give pleasure seldom and reluctantly is stubbornness. Further, one who can endure no pain, even if it is good for him, is luxurious; one who can endure all pain alike has no name literally applicable to him, but by metaphor is called hard, patient, or ready of submission. The vain man is he who thinks himself worthy of more than he is, while the poor-spirited thinks himself worthy of less. Further, the lavish is he who exceeds, the mean is he who is deficient, in every sort of expenditure. Similar are the stingy and the purse-proud; the latter exceeds what is fitting, the former falls short of it. The rogue aims at gain in any way and from any source; the simple not even from the right source. A man is envious in feeling pain at the sight of prosperity more often than he ought, for even those who deserve prosperity cause when prosperous pain to the envious; the opposite character has not so definite a name: he is one who shows excess in not grieving even at the prosperity of the undeserving, but accepts all, as gluttons accept all food, while his opposite is impatient through envy.</p>
				<p>It is superfluous to add to the definition that the particular relations to each thing should not be accidental; for no art, theoretical or productive, uses such additions to its definitions in speech or action; the addition is merely directed against logical quibbles against the arts. Take the above, then, as simple definitions, which will be made more accurate when we speak of the opposite habits.</p>
				<p>But of these states themselves there are species with names differing according as the excess is in time, in degree, or in the object provoking the state: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> one is quick-tempered through feeling anger quicker than one ought, irascible and passionate through feeling it more, acrid through one’s tendency to retain one’s anger, violent and abusive through the punishments one inflicts from anger. Epicures, gluttons, drunkards are so named from having a tendency contrary to reason to indulgence in one or the other kind of nutriment.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-41" id="noteref-41" epub:type="noteref">41</a></p>
				<p>Nor must we forget that some of the faults mentioned cannot be taken to depend on the manner of action, if manner means excess of passion: <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> the adulterer is not so called from his excessive intercourse with married women; “excess” is inapplicable here, but the act is simply in itself wicked; the passion and its character are expressed in the same word. Similarly with outrage. Hence men dispute the liability of their actions to be called by these names; they say that they had intercourse but did not commit adultery (for they acted ignorantly or by compulsion), or that they gave a blow but committed no outrage; and so they defend themselves against all other similar charges.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-2-4" epub:type="division">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">4</h3>
				<p>Having got so far, we must next say that, since there are two parts of the soul, the virtues are divided correspondingly, those of the rational part being the intellectual, whose function is truth, whether about a thing’s nature or genesis, while the others belong to the part irrational but appetitive⁠—for not any and every part of the soul, supposing it to be divisible, is appetitive. Necessarily, then, the character must be bad or good by its pursuit or avoidance of certain pleasures and pains. This is clear from our classification<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-42" id="noteref-42" epub:type="noteref">42</a> of the passions, powers, and states; for the powers and states are powers and states of the passions, and the passions are distinguished by pain and pleasure. So that for these reasons and also because of our previous propositions<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-43" id="noteref-43" epub:type="noteref">43</a> it follows that all moral virtue has to do with pleasures and pains. For by whatever things a soul tends to become better or worse, it is with regard to and in relation to these things that it finds pleasure. But we say men are bad through pleasures and pains, either by the pursuit and avoidance of improper pleasures or pains or by their pursuit in an improper way. Therefore all readily define the virtues as insensibility or immobility as regards pleasures and pains, and vices as constituted by the opposites of these.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-2-5" epub:type="division">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">5</h3>
				<p>But since we have assumed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-44" id="noteref-44" epub:type="noteref">44</a> that virtue is that sort of habit from which men have a tendency to do the best actions, and through which they are in the best disposition towards what is best; and best is what is in accordance with right reason, and this is the mean between excess and defect relative to us; it would follow that moral virtue is a mean relative to each individual himself, and is concerned with certain means in pleasures and pains, in the pleasant and the painful. The mean will sometimes be in pleasures (for there too is excess and defect), sometimes in pains, sometimes in both. For he who is excessive in his feeling of delight exceeds in the pleasant, but he who exceeds in his feeling of pain, in the painful⁠—and this either absolutely or with reference to some standard, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> when he differs from the majority of men; but the good man feels as he ought. But since there is a habit in consequence of which its possessor will in some cases admit the excess, in others the defect of the same thing, it follows that as these acts are opposed to one another and to the mean, so the habits will also be opposed to one another and to virtue.</p>
				<p>It happens, however, that sometimes all these oppositions will be clearer, sometimes those on the side of excess, sometimes those on the side of defect. And the reason of the difference is that the unlikeness or likeness to the mean is not always of the same kind, but in one case one might change quicker from the excess to the middle habit, sometimes from the defect, and the person further distant seems more opposed; <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> in regard to the body excess in exercise is healthier than defect, and nearer to the mean, but in food defect is healthier than excess. And so of those states of will which tend to training now some, now others, will show a greater tendency to health in case of the two acts of choice<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-45" id="noteref-45" epub:type="noteref">45</a>⁠—now those good at work, now those good at abstemiousness;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-46" id="noteref-46" epub:type="noteref">46</a> and he who is opposed to the moderate and the reasonable will be the man who avoids exercise, not both; and in the case of food the self-indulgent man, not the man who starves himself. And the reason is that from the start our nature does not diverge in the same way from the mean as regards all things; we are less inclined to exercise, and more inclined to indulgence. So it is too with regard to the soul. We regard, then, as the habit opposed to the mean, that towards which both our faults and men in general are more inclined⁠—the other extreme, as though not existent, escapes our notice, being unperceived because of its rarity. Thus we oppose anger to gentleness, and the irascible to the gentle. Yet there is also excess in the direction of gentleness and readiness to be reconciled, and the repression of anger when one is struck. But the men prone to this are few, and all incline more to the opposite extreme; there is none of the spirit of reconciliation<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a> in anger.</p>
				<p>And since we have reached a list of the habits in regard to the several passions, with their excesses and defects, and the opposite habits in virtue of which men are as right reason directs them to be⁠—(what right reason is, and with an eye to what standard we are to fix the mean, must be considered later<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a>)⁠—it is clear that all the moral virtues and vices have to do with excesses and defects of pleasures and pains, and that pleasures and pains arise from the above-mentioned habits and passions. But the best habit is that which is the mean in respect of each class of things. It is clear then that all, or at least some, of the virtues will be connected with means.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-2-6" epub:type="division">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">6</h3>
				<p>Let us, then, take another starting-point for the succeeding inquiry. Every substance is by nature a sort of principle; therefore each can produce many similar to itself, as man man, animals<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a> in general animals, and plants plants. But in addition to this <em>man</em> alone of animals is also the source of certain actions; for no other animal would be said to act. Such principles, which are primary sources of movements, are called principles in the strict sense, and most properly such as have necessary results; God is doubtless a principle of this kind. The strict sense of “principle” is not to be found among principles without movement, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> those of mathematics, though by analogy we use the name there also. For there, too, if the principle should change, practically all that is proved from it would alter; but its consequences do not change themselves, one being destroyed by another, except by destroying the assumption and, by its refutation, proving the truth.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a> But man is the source of a kind of movement, for action is movement. But since, as elsewhere, the source or principle is the cause of all that exists or arises through it, we must take the same view as in demonstrations. For if, supposing the triangle to have its angles equal to two right angles, the quadrilateral must have them equal to four right angles, it is clear that the property of the triangle is the cause of this last. And if the triangle should change, then so must the quadrilateral, having six right angles if the triangle has three, and eight if it has four: but if the former does not change but remains as it was before, so must the quadrilateral.</p>
				<p>The necessity of what we are endeavouring to show is clear from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analytics</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a> at present we can neither affirm nor deny anything with precision except just this.</p>
				<p>Supposing there were no further cause for the triangle’s having the above property, then the triangle would be a sort of principle or cause of all that comes later. So that if anything existent may have the opposite to its actual qualities, so of necessity may its principles. For what results from the necessary is necessary; but the results of the contingent might be the opposite of what they are; what depends on men themselves forms a great portion of contingent matters, and men themselves are the sources of such contingent results. So that it is clear that all the acts of which man is the principle and controller may either happen or not happen, and that their happening or not happening⁠—those at least of whose existence or nonexistence he has the control⁠—depends on him. But of what it depends on him to do or not to do, he is himself the cause; and what he is the cause of depends on him. And since virtue and vice and the acts that spring from them are respectively praised or blamed⁠—for we do not praise or blame for what is due to necessity, or chance, or nature, but only for what we ourselves are causes of; for what another is the cause of, for that he bears the blame or praise⁠—it is clear that virtue and vice have to do with matters where the man himself is the cause and source of his acts. We must then ascertain of what actions he is himself the source and cause. Now, we all admit that of acts that are voluntary and done from the deliberate choice of each man he is the cause, but of involuntary acts he is not himself the cause; and all that he does from deliberate choice he clearly does voluntarily. It is clear then that virtue and vice have to do with voluntary acts.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-2-7" epub:type="division">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">7</h3>
				<p>We must then ascertain what is the voluntary and the involuntary, and what is deliberate choice, since by these virtue and vice are defined. First we must consider the voluntary and involuntary. Of three things it would seem to be one, agreement with either desire, or choice, or thought⁠—that is, the voluntary would agree, the involuntary would be contrary to one of these. But again, desire is divided into three sorts, wish, anger, and sensual appetite.</p>
				<p>We have, then, to distinguish these, and first to consider the case of agreement with sensual appetite. Now all that is in agreement with sensual appetite would seem to be voluntary; for all the involuntary seems to be forced, and what is forced is painful, and so is all that men do and suffer from compulsion⁠—as Evenus says,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a> “all to which we are compelled is unpleasant.” So that if an act is painful it is forced on us, and if forced it is painful. But all that is contrary to sensual appetite is painful⁠—for such appetite is for the pleasant⁠—and therefore forced and involuntary; what then agrees with sensual appetite is voluntary; for these two are opposites. Further, all wickedness makes one more unjust, and incontinence seems to be wickedness, the incontinent being the sort of man that acts in accordance with his appetite and contrary to his reason, and shows his incontinence when he acts in accordance with his appetite; but to act unjustly is voluntary, so that the incontinent will act unjustly by acting according to his appetite; he will then act voluntarily, and what is done according to appetite is voluntary. Indeed, it would be absurd that those who become incontinent should be more just.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a></p>
				<p>From these considerations, then, the act done from appetite would seem voluntary, but from the following the opposite: what a man does voluntarily he wishes, and what he wishes to do he does voluntarily. But no one wishes what he thinks to be bad; but surely the man who acts incontinently does not do what he wishes, for to act incontinently is to act through appetite contrary to what the man thinks best; whence it results that the same man acts at the same time both voluntarily and involuntarily; but this is impossible. Further, the continent will do a just act, and more so than incontinence; for continence is a virtue, and virtue makes men more just. Now one acts continently whenever he acts against his appetite in accordance with his reason. So that if to act justly is voluntary as to act unjustly is⁠—for both these seem to be voluntary, and if the one is, so must the other be⁠—but action contrary to appetite is involuntary, then the same man will at the same time do the same thing voluntarily and involuntarily.</p>
				<p>The same argument may be applied to anger; for there is thought to be a continence and incontinence of anger just as there is of appetite; and what is contrary to our anger is painful, and the repression is forced, so that if the forced is involuntary, all acts done out of anger would be voluntary. Heraclitus, too, seems to be regarding the strength of anger when he says that the restraint of it is painful⁠—“It is hard,” he says, “to fight with anger; for it gives its life for what it desires.” But if it is impossible for a man voluntarily and involuntarily to do the same thing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a> at the same time, and in regard to<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a> the same part of the act, then what is done from wish is more voluntary than that which is done from appetite or anger; and a proof of this is that we do many things voluntarily without anger or desire.</p>
				<p>It remains then to consider whether to act from wish and to act voluntarily are identical. But this too seems impossible. For we assumed and all admit that wickedness makes men more unjust, and incontinence seems a kind of wickedness. But the opposite will result from the hypothesis above; for no one wishes what he thinks bad, but does it when he becomes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a> incontinent. If, then, to commit injustice is voluntary, and the voluntary is what agrees with wish, then when a man becomes incontinent he will be no longer committing injustice, but will be more just than before he became incontinent. But this is impossible.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a> That the voluntary then is not action in accordance with desire, nor the involuntary action in opposition to it, is clear.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-2-8" epub:type="division">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">8</h3>
				<p>But again, that action in accordance with, or in opposition to, choice is not the true description of the voluntary and involuntary is clear from the following considerations: it has been shown<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a> that the act in agreement with wish was not involuntary, but rather that all that one wishes is voluntary, though it has also been shown<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a> that one may do voluntarily what one does not wish. But we do many things from wish suddenly, but no one deliberately chooses an act suddenly.</p>
				<p>But if, as we saw,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a> the voluntary must be one of these three⁠—action according either to desire, choice, or thought, and it is not two of these, the remaining alternative is that the voluntary consists in action with some kind of thought. Advancing a little further, let us close our delimitation of the voluntary and the involuntary. To act on compulsion or not on compulsion seems connected with these terms; for we say that the enforced is involuntary, and all the involuntary is enforced: so that first we must consider the action done on compulsion, its nature and its relation to the voluntary and the involuntary. Now the enforced and the necessary, force and necessity, seem opposed to the voluntary and to persuasion in the case of acts done. Generally, we speak of enforced action and necessity even in the case of inanimate things; for we say that a stone moves upwards and fire downwards on compulsion and by force; but when they move according to their natural internal tendency, we do not call the act one due to force; nor do we call it voluntary either; there is no name for this antithesis; but when they move contrary to this tendency, then we say they move by force. So, too, among things living and among animals we often see things suffering and acting from force, when something from without moves them contrary to their own internal tendency. Now in the inanimate the moving principle is simple, but in the animated there is more than one principle; for desire and reason do not always agree. And so with the other animals the action on compulsion is simple (just as in the inanimate), for they have not desire and reason opposing one another, but live by desire; but man has both, that is at a certain age, to which we attribute also the power of action; for we do not use this term of the child, nor of the brute, but only of the man who has come to act from reason.</p>
				<p>So the compulsory act seems always painful, and no one acts from force and yet with pleasure. Hence there arises much dispute about the continent and incontinent, for each of them acts with two tendencies mutually opposed, so that (as the expression goes) the continent forcibly drags himself from the pleasant appetites (for he feels pain in dragging himself away against the resistance of desire), while the incontinent forcibly drags himself contrary to his reason. But still the latter seems less to be in pain; for appetite is for the pleasant, and this he follows with delight; so that the incontinent rather acts voluntarily and not from force, because he acts without pain. But persuasion is opposed to force and necessity, and the continent goes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-61" id="noteref-61" epub:type="noteref">61</a> towards what he is persuaded of, and so proceeds not from force but voluntarily. But appetite leads without persuading, being devoid of reason. We have, then, shown<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-62" id="noteref-62" epub:type="noteref">62</a> that these alone seem to act from force and involuntarily, and why they seem to, <abbr>viz.</abbr> from a certain likeness to the enforced action, in virtue of which we attribute enforced action also to the inanimate. Yet if we add<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-63" id="noteref-63" epub:type="noteref">63</a> the addition made in our definition, there also the statement becomes untrue. For it is only when something <em>external</em> moves a thing, or brings it to rest against its own internal tendency, that we say this happens by force; otherwise we do not say that it happens by force. But in the continent and the incontinent it is the present <em>internal</em> tendency that leads them, for they have both tendencies. So that neither acts on compulsion nor by force, but, as far at least as the above goes, voluntarily. For the external moving principle, that hinders or moves in opposition to the internal tendency, is what we call necessity, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> when we strike someone with the hand of one whose wish and appetite alike resist; but when the principle is from within, there is no force. Further, there is both pleasure and pain in both; for the continent feels pain now in acting against his appetite, but has the pleasure of hope, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> that he will be presently benefited, or even the pleasure of being actually at present benefited because he is in health; while the incontinent is pleased at getting through his incontinency what he desires, but has a pain of expectation, thinking that he is doing ill. So that to say that both act from compulsion is not without reason, the one sometimes acting involuntarily owing to his desire, the other owing to his reason; these two, being separated, are thrust out by one another. Whence men apply the language to the soul as a whole, because we see something like the above in the case of<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-64" id="noteref-64" epub:type="noteref">64</a> the elements of the soul. Now of the parts of the soul this may be said; but the soul as a whole, whether in the continent or the incontinent, acts voluntarily, and neither acts on compulsion, but one of the elements in them does, since by nature we have both. For reason is in them by nature, because if growth is permitted and not maimed, it will be there; and appetite, because it accompanies and is present in us from birth. But these are practically the two marks by which we define the natural⁠—it is either that which is found with us as soon as we are born, or that which comes to us if growth is allowed to proceed regularly, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> grey hair, old age, and so on. So that either acts, in a way,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-65" id="noteref-65" epub:type="noteref">65</a> contrary to nature, and yet, broadly speaking, according to nature, but not the same nature. The puzzles then about the continent and incontinent are these⁠—do both, or one of them, act on compulsion, so that they act involuntarily or else at the same time both on compulsion and voluntarily; that is, if the compulsory is involuntary, both voluntarily and involuntarily? And it is tolerably clear from the above how these puzzles are to be met.</p>
				<p>In another way, too, men are said to act by force and compulsion without any disagreement between reason and desire in them, <abbr>viz.</abbr> when they do what they consider both painful and bad, but they are threatened with stripes, imprisonment, or death, if they do not do it. Such acts they say they did on compulsion. Or shall we deny this, and say that all do the act itself voluntarily? for they had the power to abstain from doing it, and to submit to the suffering. Again perhaps one might say that some such acts were voluntary and some not. For whatever of the acts that a man does without wishing them he has the power to do or abstain from doing,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-66" id="noteref-66" epub:type="noteref">66</a> these he always does voluntarily and not by force; but those in which he has not this power, he does by force in a sense (but not absolutely), because he does not choose the very thing he does, but the purpose for which it is done, since there is a difference, too, in this. For if a man were to murder another that he might not catch him at blind man’s buff he would be laughed at if he were to say that he acted by force, and on compulsion; there ought to be some greater and more painful evil that he would suffer if he did not commit the murder. For then he will act on compulsion, and either<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-67" id="noteref-67" epub:type="noteref">67</a> by force, or at least not by nature, when he does something evil for the sake of good, or release from a greater evil; then he will at least act involuntarily, for such acts are not subject to his control. Hence, many regard love, anger in some cases, and natural conditions, as involuntary, as being too strong for nature; we feel indulgence for them as things capable of overpowering nature. A man would more seem to act from force and involuntarily, if he acted to escape violent than if to escape gentle pain, and generally if to escape pain than if to get pleasure. For that which depends on him⁠—and all turns on this⁠—is what his nature is able to bear; what it is not, what is not under the control of his natural desire or reason, that does not depend on him. Therefore those who are inspired and prophesy, though their act is one of thought, we still say have it not in their own power either to say what they said, or to do what they did. And so of acts done through appetite. So that some thoughts and passions do not depend on us, nor the acts following such thoughts and reasonings, but, as Philolaus said, some arguments are too strong for us.</p>
				<p>So that if the voluntary and involuntary had to be considered<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-68" id="noteref-68" epub:type="noteref">68</a> in reference to the presence of force as well as from other points of view, let this be our final distinction. Nothing obscures the idea of the voluntary so much as the use of the expression that men act from force and yet voluntarily.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-2-9" epub:type="division">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">9</h3>
				<p>Since we have finished this subject, and we have found the voluntary not to be defined either by desire or by choice, it remains to define it as that which depends on thought. The voluntary, then, seems opposed to the involuntary, and to act with knowledge of the person acted on, instrument and tendency⁠—for sometimes one knows the object, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> as father, but not that the tendency of the act is to kill, not to save, as in the case of Pelias’s daughters; or knows the object to be a drink but takes it to be a philtre or wine when it was really hemlock⁠—seems opposed to action in ignorance of the person, instrument, or thing, if, that is, the action is essentially the effect of ignorance. All that is done owing to ignorance, whether of person, instrument, or thing, is involuntary; the opposite therefore is voluntary. All, then, that a man does⁠—it being in his power to abstain from doing it⁠—not in ignorance and owing to himself must needs be voluntary; voluntariness is this. But all that he does in ignorance and owing to his ignorance, he does involuntarily. But since science or knowledge is of two sorts, one the possession, the other the use of knowledge, the man who has, but does not use knowledge may in a sense be justly called ignorant, but in another sense not justly, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> if he had not used his knowledge owing to carelessness. Similarly, one might be blamed for not having the knowledge, if it were something easy or necessary and he does not have it because of carelessness or pleasure or pain. This, then, we must add to our definition.</p>
				<p>Such, then, is the completion of our distinction of the voluntary and the involuntary.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-2-10" epub:type="division">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">10</h3>
				<p>Let us next speak about choice, first raising various difficulties about it. For one might doubt to what genus it belongs and in which to place it, and whether the voluntary and the chosen are or are not the same. Now some insist that choice is either opinion or desire, and the inquirer might well think that it was one or the other, for both are found accompanying it. Now that it is not desire is plain; for then it would be either wish, appetite, or anger, for none desires without having experienced one of these feelings. But anger and appetite belong also to the brutes while choice does not; further, even those who are capable of both the former often choose without either anger or appetite; and when they are under the influence of those passions they do not choose but remain unmoved by them. Further, anger and appetite always involve pain, but we often choose without pain. But neither are wish and choice the same; for we often wish for what we know is impossible, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> to rule all mankind or to be immortal, but no one chooses such things unless ignorant of the impossibility, nor even what is possible, generally, if he does not think it in his power to do or to abstain from doing it. So that this is clear, that the object of choice must be one of the things in our own power. Similarly, choice is not an opinion nor, generally, what one thinks; for the object of choice was<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-69" id="noteref-69" epub:type="noteref">69</a> something in one’s power and many things may be thought that are not, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> that the diagonal is commensurable; and further, choice is not either true or false. Nor yet is choice identical with our opinion about matters of practice which are in our own power, as when we think that we ought to do or not to do something. This argument applies to wish as well as to opinion; for no one chooses an end, but the means to an end, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> no one chooses to be in health, but to walk or to sit for the purpose of keeping well; no one chooses to be happy but to make money or run risks for the purpose of being happy. And in general, in choosing we show both what we choose and for what we choose it, the latter being that for which we choose something else, the former that which we choose for something else. But it is the end that we specially <em>wish for</em>, and we <em>think</em> we ought to be healthy and happy. So that it is clear through this that choice is different both from opinion and from wish; for wish and opinion are specially of the end, but choice is not.</p>
				<p>It is clear, then, that choice is not wish, or opinion, or judgement simply. But in what does it differ from these? How is it related to the voluntary? The answer to these questions will also make it clear what choice is. Of possible things, then, there are some such that we can deliberate about them, while about others we cannot. For some things are possible, but the production of them is not in our power, some being due to nature, others to other causes; and about these none would attempt to deliberate except in ignorance. But about others, not only existence and nonexistence is possible, but also human deliberation; these are things the doing or not doing of which is in our own power. Therefore, we do not deliberate about the affairs of the Indians nor how the circle may be squared; for the first are not in <em>our</em> power, the second is wholly beyond the power of action; but we do not even deliberate about all things that may be done and that are in our power (by which it is clear that choice is not opinion simply), though the matters of choice and action belong to the class of things in our own power. One might then raise the problem⁠—why do doctors deliberate about matters within their science, but not grammarians? The reason is that error may occur in two ways (either in reasoning or in perception when we are engaged in the very act), and in medicine one may go wrong in both ways, but in grammar one can do so only in respect of the perception and action, and if they inquired about this there would be no end to their inquiries. Since then choice is<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a> neither opinion nor wish singly nor yet both (for no one chooses suddenly, though he thinks he ought to act, and wishes, suddenly), it must be compounded of both, for both are found in a man choosing. But we must ask⁠—how compounded out of these? The very name is some indication. For choice is not simply taking but taking one thing before another; and this is impossible without consideration and deliberation; therefore choice arises out of deliberate opinion.</p>
				<p>Now about the end no one deliberates (this being fixed for all), but about that which tends to it⁠—whether this or that tends to it, and⁠—supposing this or that resolved on⁠—how it is to be brought about. All consider this till they have brought the commencement of the production to a point in their own power. If then, no one deliberately chooses without some preparation, without some consideration whether it is better or worse to do so-and-so, and if one considers all that are in one’s power of the means to the end which are capable of existing or not existing, it is clear that choice is a considered desire for something in one’s own power; for we all consider what we choose, but we do not choose all that we consider. I call it considered when consideration is the source and cause of the desire, and the man desires because of the consideration. Therefore in the other animals choice does not exist, nor in man at every age or in every condition; for there is not consideration or judgement of the ground of an act; but it is quite possible that many animals have an opinion whether a thing is to be done or not; only thinking with consideration is impossible to them. For the considering part of the soul is that which observes a cause of some sort; and the object of an action is one of the causes; for we call cause that owing to which a thing comes about; but the purpose of a thing’s existence or production is what we specially call its cause, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> of walking, the fetching of things, if this is the purpose for which one walks. Therefore, those who have no aim fixed have no inclination to deliberate. So that since, if a man of himself and not through ignorance does or abstains from that which is in his power to do or abstain from, he acts or abstains voluntarily, but we do many such things without deliberation or premeditation, it follows that all that has been deliberately chosen is voluntary, but not all the voluntary is deliberately chosen, and that all that is according to choice is voluntary, but not all that is voluntary is according to choice. And at the same time it is clear from this that those legislators define well who enact that some states of feeling are to be considered voluntary, some involuntary, and some premeditated; for if they are not thoroughly accurate, at least they approximate to the truth. But about this we will speak in our investigation of justice;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a> meanwhile, it is clear that deliberate choice is not simply wish or simply opinion, but opinion and desire together when following as a conclusion from deliberation.</p>
				<p>But since in deliberating one always deliberates for the sake of some end, and he who deliberates has always an aim by reference to which he judges what is expedient, no one deliberates about the end; this is the starting-point and assumption, like the assumptions in theoretical science (we have spoken about this shortly in the beginning of this work and minutely in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Analytics</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-72" id="noteref-72" epub:type="noteref">72</a>). Everyone’s inquiry, whether made with or without art, is about what tends to the end, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> whether they shall go to war or not, when this is what they are deliberating about. But the cause or object will come first, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> wealth, pleasure, or anything else of the sort that happens to be our object. For the man deliberating deliberates if he has considered, from the point of view of the end, what<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a> conduces to bringing the end within his own action, or what he at present can do towards the object. But the object or end is always something good by nature, and men deliberate about its partial constituents, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> the doctor whether he is to give a drug, or the general where he is to pitch his camp. To them the absolutely best end is good. But contrary to nature and by perversion<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-74" id="noteref-74" epub:type="noteref">74</a> not the good but the apparent good is the end. And the reason is that some things cannot be used for anything but what their nature determines, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> sight; for one can see nothing but what is visible, nor hear anything but what is audible. But science enables us to do what does not belong to that science; for the same science is not similarly related to health and disease, but naturally to the former, contrary to nature to the latter. And similarly wish is of the good naturally, but of the bad contrary to nature, and by nature one wishes the good, but contrary to nature and through perversion<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-75" id="noteref-75" epub:type="noteref">75</a> the bad as well.</p>
				<p>But further, the corruption and perversion of a thing does not tend to anything at random but to the contrary or the intermediate between it and the contrary. For out of this province one cannot go, since error leads not to anything at random but to the contrary of truth where there is a contrary, and to that contrary which is according to the appropriate science contrary. Therefore, the error and the resulting choice must deviate from the mean towards the opposite⁠—and the opposite of the mean is excess or defect. And the cause is pleasantness or painfulness; for we are so constituted that the pleasant appears good to the soul and the more pleasant better, while the painful appears bad and the more painful worse. So that from this also it is clear that virtue and vice have to do with pleasures and pains; for they have to do with objects of choice, and choice has to do with the good and bad or what seems such, and pleasure and pain naturally seem such.</p>
				<p>It follows then, since moral virtue is itself a mean and wholly concerned with pleasures and pains, and vice lies in excess or defect and is concerned with the same matters as virtue, that moral virtue is a habit tending to choose the mean in relation to us in things pleasant and painful, in regard to which, according as one is pleased or pained, men are said to have a definite sort of character; for one is not said to have a special sort of character merely for liking what is sweet or what is bitter.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-2-11" epub:type="division">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal">11</h3>
				<p>These distinctions having been made, let us say whether virtue makes the choice correct and the end right so that a man chooses for the right end, or whether (as some say) it makes the reason so. But what does this is continence, for this preserves the reason. But virtue and continence differ. We must speak later about them,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-76" id="noteref-76" epub:type="noteref">76</a> since those who think that virtue makes the reason right, do so for this cause⁠—namely, that<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-77" id="noteref-77" epub:type="noteref">77</a> continence is of this nature and continence is one of the things we praise. Now that we have discussed preliminary questions let us state our view.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-78" id="noteref-78" epub:type="noteref">78</a> It is possible for the aim to be right, but for a man to go wrong in the means to that aim; and again the aim may be mistaken, while the means leading to it are right; or both may be mistaken. Does then virtue make the aim, or the means to that aim? We say the aim, because this is not attained by inference or reasoning. Let us assume this as starting-point. For the doctor does not ask whether one ought to be in health or not, but whether one ought to walk or not; nor does the trainer ask whether one ought to be in good condition or not, but whether one should wrestle or not. And similarly no art asks questions about the end; for as in theoretical sciences the assumptions are our starting-points, so in the productive the end is starting-point and assumed. <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">E.g.</abbr> we reason that since this body is to be made healthy, therefore so-and-so must be found in it if health is to be had⁠—just as in geometry we argue, if the angles of the triangle are equal to two right angles, then so-and-so must be the case. The end aimed at is, then, the starting-point of our thought, the end of our thought the starting-point of action. If, then, of all correctness either reason or virtue is the cause, if reason is not the cause, then the end (but not the means) must owe its rightness to virtue. But the end is the object of the action; for all choice is of some thing and for the sake of some object. The object, then, is the mean, and virtue is the cause of this by choosing it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a> Still choice is not of this but of the things done for the sake of this. To hit on these things⁠—I mean what ought to be done for the sake of the object⁠—belongs to another faculty; but of the rightness of the end of the choice the cause is virtue. And therefore it is from a man’s choice that we judge his character⁠—that is from the object for the sake of which he acts, not from the act itself. Similarly, vice makes the choice to be for the sake of the opposite object. If, then, a man, having it in his power to do the honourable and abstain from the base, does the opposite, it is clear that this man is not good. Hence, it follows that both vice and virtue are voluntary; for there is no necessity to do what is wicked. Therefore vice is blamable and virtue praiseworthy. For the involuntary if base or bad is not blamable, if good is not praiseworthy, but only the voluntary. Further, we praise and blame all men with regard to their choice rather than their acts (though activity is more desirable than virtue), because men may do bad acts under compulsion, but no one chooses them under compulsion. Further, it is only because it is not easy to see the nature of a man’s choice that we are forced to judge of his character by his acts. The activity then is more desirable, but the choice more praiseworthy. And this both follows from our assumptions and is in agreement with observation.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
